The Project Gutenberg eBook of Point Park Lookout Mountain and
Chattanooga Battlefields, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Point Park Lookout Mountain and Chattanooga Battlefields
       National Military Park, Georgia and Tennessee

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 19, 2021 [eBook #65875]

Language: English

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net 

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POINT PARK LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN
AND CHATTANOOGA BATTLEFIELDS ***





                               Point Park
                            Lookout Mountain
                            and Chattanooga
                              Battlefields


                      CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA
                        _National Military Park_
                         GEORGIA AND TENNESSEE

    [Illustration: Seal]

                             UNITED STATES
                       DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
                         National Park Service




The National Park System, of which this area is a unit, is dedicated to
conserving the scenic, scientific, and historic heritage of the United
States for the benefit and inspiration of its people.

     Cover: _Chattanooga and the winding Tennessee River from Point
    Park, Lookout Mountain._

             U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1961 0-618486 REPRINT 1961

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




       Point Park, Lookout Mountain and Chattanooga Battlefields
           CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA NATIONAL MILITARY PARK


  _The Battle of Chattanooga—a Union victory in November 1863 which
  secured that important railroad center and opened the way for the
  Atlanta Campaign_

Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park, oldest and largest
of the national military park areas, was established in commemoration of
two important battles of the American Civil War. On these battlefields
gallant soldiers of the North and the South fought for control of
Chattanooga, strategic railroad center and gateway to the heart of the
Confederate States. Here, thousands of men on both sides exemplified the
true American qualities of independence, courage, and self-sacrifice,
which constitute the enduring strength of our democracy. At the
dedication of the park, a veteran of the battle said: “Here ... we and
they, the living and the dead, Confederate and Federal, fought for the
right as each understood it, for the Constitution as each construed it,
and for the liberty as each interpreted it.”




                     _The Campaign for Chattanooga_


Chattanooga was an important railroad center at the time of the Civil
War. Railroad lines radiated in the four principal directions and
provided connections with Nashville, Memphis, Atlanta, and Richmond. The
location of the city on the navigable Tennessee River where there were
gaps in the mountains added to its strategic value. Its capture by Union
forces would be a severe blow to the South. It would check the east and
west passage of men and supplies for the Southern armies and provide a
springboard for the invasion of Georgia.

During the summer and early fall of 1863, by skillful maneuvers, the
Union Army of the Cumberland forced the Southern Army of Tennessee out
of middle Tennessee and Chattanooga. On September 19 and 20, at
Chickamauga Creek in Georgia, the two armies met in one of the fiercest
engagements of the war. While this battle ended in Confederate victory,
the Union forces succeeded in retreating northward into Chattanooga.

The Confederates now settled down to siege tactics and attempted to
force the surrender of the Army of the Cumberland through starvation. By
occupying Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge and by establishing a
line between the two heights, they cut off all but the most difficult
route by which supplies could be brought into the city. Within a month
the Union Army in Chattanooga was in a desperate situation and was
reduced to half rations. Ten thousand horses and mules died and
surrender seemed inevitable.

The North, however, met this crisis by a change of command and
reinforcements. Troops from the Army of the Potomac in Virginia and from
Grant’s Vicksburg forces in Mississippi were sent hurrying to
Chattanooga, and General Grant arrived to take the overall command.

The reinforcements arrived in time to save the besieged army. A new
supply route was opened and was successfully defended. As a result of
this timely aid, the siege of Chattanooga failed. Nevertheless, the
Confederates still held their positions. In November the greatly
strengthened Union Army assumed the offensive.

    [Illustration: _Missionary Ridge from DeLong Reservation._]




                      _The Battle of Chattanooga_


The Battle of Chattanooga was a 3-day engagement, November 23 to 25. As
planned by the Union officers, victory was to be won by a flanking
movement against the Confederate right wing on the north end of
Missionary Ridge. If this position were carried, Union troops in the
center were to join in an effort to sweep the Confederates from their
base of supplies and communications and to defeat them. The engagement,
however, developed much differently. While the main force was maneuvered
into position, a demonstration attack was made on a Confederate outpost
at Orchard Knob, about a mile in front of Missionary Ridge. This advance
movement was successfully carried out on November 23 but it warned the
Confederates of danger on that right flank and prompted them to
strengthen their positions.

On the next day, while the maneuvering force was still getting into
position, the Union officers tried another demonstration, this time to
divert the Confederates on their left. Moving along the slopes of
Lookout Mountain from the western side, Union troops gradually drove
back the few Confederate defenders. At Cravens Farm, however, they met
stubborn resistance from an entrenched line of troops. Here the fighting
was most serious, the Confederates finally being dislodged and forced to
retreat to a new line 400 yards beyond. At this point the fighting
ended, and although the Confederates had not yet been driven from the
mountain, their position was in danger. Rather than risk being cut off
from the main line of forces on Missionary Ridge, the Confederate
commander, General Bragg, evacuated all troops from Lookout Mountain and
the valley below. When Union soldiers scaled the palisades the next
morning, they found the mountain deserted.

On the third day, the Union Army resumed the attempt to gain a foothold
on the north end of Missionary Ridge, which it had previously failed to
take, but all attacks were repulsed by the Confederates. The forces on
Lookout Mountain were ordered to advance across Chattanooga Valley to
attack the Confederate left flank, but they advanced slowly. Meanwhile,
in order to relieve the situation on both Union flanks, other troops
were thrown against the Confederate rifle pits along the base of
Missionary Ridge. In a rush these Union soldiers carried the rifle pits.
Then in their enthusiasm, without waiting for further orders, they
charged up the mountain slopes and broke the Confederate positions. This
precipitated a general retreat of the Confederate Army across the border
into Georgia. Complete control of Chattanooga and its approaches had at
last been won by the Union.

    [Illustration: _Tennessee River from Point Park, Lookout Mountain._]




                               _The Park_


Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park is composed of
separate areas, the more important of which are: Chickamauga
Battlefield, in Georgia; Point Park and the Battlefield of Lookout
Mountain, and Orchard Knob, in Chattanooga; a chain of small
reservations located on Missionary Ridge; and Signal Point on Signal
Mountain. The park contains approximately 8,190 acres of Federal land.




             _Point Park and Lookout Mountain Battlefield_


You are urged to go first to Point Park on Lookout Mountain, where from
the terrace of the Adolph S. Ochs Observatory and Museum, high above the
winding Tennessee River, you may obtain a comprehensive view of the
Battlefield of Chattanooga. On the parapet are markers to identify the
more important troop positions, and maps are available to indicate the
natural and historic features of interest. You may get further
assistance from a National Park Service attendant.

The observatory and museum bears the name of one of the park’s major
benefactors, the late Adolph S. Ochs, publisher of the Chattanooga Times
and the New York Times. He was responsible for the acquisition of
considerable land on Lookout Mountain for inclusion in the park.

From Lookout Point interesting foot trails, extending along eastern and
western flanks of the mountain, will reveal to you unusual rock
formations typical of the area and will provide ever-changing and
beautiful vistas of the countryside below.

You can reach Point Park from Chattanooga via U. S. 41, 64, 72, and 11
which combine as they leave the city and skirt the base of Lookout
Mountain. You then turn off on the Scenic Highway, which leads up the
mountain to the park entrance. You may also visit the park by means of
the St. Elmo buses from Chattanooga, which connect with the Lookout
Mountain Incline Railway at the foot of the mountain. The top of the
incline is within short walking distance of the Point Park entrance.




                           _Missionary Ridge_


To commemorate the engagement on Missionary Ridge, there are a series of
park areas located at important points on the ridge. Access to these
areas is provided by the Crest Road which runs the entire length of the
line occupied by the Confederates during the battle. Markers, monuments,
tablets, and gun positions will provide you with information, and you
can get excellent views of Chattanooga along this drive. The more
important units of the park on Missionary Ridge are: The Sherman
Reservation, where Sherman’s forces unsuccessfully attacked the north
end of the Confederate line; the DeLong Reservation, site of one of the
breaks in the Confederate line; the Ohio Reservation, an area set aside
to commemorate the participation of Ohio troops in the battles; and the
Bragg Reservation, where the Confederate commander had his headquarters.




                             _Orchard Knob_


This unit of the park is located near McCallie Avenue (U. S. 11 and 64),
in Chattanooga. It marks the site where the first action of the Battle
of Chattanooga took place. Orchard Knob became General Grant’s
headquarters during the remainder of the battle.




                            _Administration_


Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park is administered by
the National Park Service of the United States Department of the
Interior.

At the park headquarters, located on the Chickamauga Battlefield in
Georgia, there are a museum and reference library. The Fuller gun
collection of American shoulder arms is an outstanding attraction of the
museum.

Additional information may be obtained by addressing the Superintendent,
Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park, Fort Oglethorpe, Ga.

Those who plan to visit in a group may receive special service if
advance arrangements are made with the superintendent.

    [Illustration: CHICKAMAUGA AND CHATTANOOGA
    NATIONAL MILITARY PARK
    GEORGIA AND TENNESSEE]




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POINT PARK LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND
CHATTANOOGA BATTLEFIELDS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
